Leo Tolstoy. Letter to a Hindoo


Leo Tolstoy. Letter to a Hindoo



     OCR: Gabriel Mumjiev




     All that exists is One;  people only call this One  by different names.
(Veddas)

     God is love,  and he  that  abideth  in love abideth  in  God,  and God
abideth in him (1 Ep. John. Chap. 4)

     God is one Whole; we are the parts.
     (Exposition of the teaching of the Veddas by Vivekananda)


I


     Do  not seek  rest  in  that plane where  the  earthly gives  birth  to
thoughts and  desires, for if  thou dost, thou  will  be dragged through the
rough wilderness of life, which is not of Me. Whenever thou feelst that  thy
feet are becoming entangled in the interlaced roots of life, know then  that
thou hast strayed  from the path to which I  beckon thee, for I have  placed
thee in broad smooth paths which are strewn with flowers.
     I have put a light before thee,  which thou can'st follow  and thus run
without stumbling.
     (Krishna P. 212.)


     I  received your letter  and the two issues of the  magazine. Both were
intensely  interesting to  me;  indeed, the  oppression of a  majority of  a
people and  the  corruption which flows from  it, is a  phenomenon which has
always occupied my mind and at present is entirely occupying my attention. I
will  endeavour to convey to  you what I think, both in a  particular and  a
general way,  about those causes from which  those dreadful calamities  have
arisen and do arise,  of which you  write in your letter and  which are also
mentioned in the two numbers of the Hindoo magazine you sent me.
     The causes, owing  to which this  astonishing spectacle arises, of  the
majority of  the labouring  classes  submitting to a  mere handful of idlers
whom it permits to dispose not only of its labour but also of its very life,
are always and everywhere the same; whether the oppressors and the oppressed
belong  to the  same, or, as  is the case in  India and in other  countries,
where the dominant class belongs to an entirely different nation  from those
oppressed.
     It appears  especially strange of  India, for here we  have a people of
200  millions  of  individuals,  highly endowed with spiritual  and physical
powers, in  absolute subjection  to  a  small  clique,  composed of  persons
utterly alien in thought  and  aspiration  and  altogether inferior to those
whom they enslave.
     These causes, as one can easily see from your letter, from the articles
in  "Free  Hindustan", from the  highly interesting  writings of  the Hindoo
Swami  Vivekananda  and  others, are in  accord  with that which causes  the
distress  of all  the  peoples of our  time;  in the absence  of  a rational
religious teaching  which,  while  elucidating the  meaning of  life  to the
people in an equal  way,  would also make clear the higher law, which should
be a guide  to conduct, and  in the  substitution for them of  the more than
dubious  propositions of a  false  religion and pseudo  science, and  in the
immoral conclusions called civilization derived from both.
     One has already seen not only from your letter and from the articles in
"Free Hindustan", but also  from the entire  Hindoo political  literature of
our  times, that the  majority of the leaders of  public opinions among  the
native  races  of India, while no longer ascribing any significance to those
religious teachings which were professed, and are professed  by  the  Hindoo
peoples, now find the sole  possibility  of deliverance  from the oppression
they  endure, in embracing those anti-religious and subtly immoral forms  of
social order  in which the  English and other pseudo Christian nations  live
to-day. Nothing shows more clearly than this, the total absence of religious
consciousness in the  minds of the present  day  leaders of Hindoo  peoples,
than does  this  tendency  to instill  into the hearts  of  the natives  the
acceptance of the forms  of  life  in operation  amongst  European  nations.
Meanwhile, in the  absence  of this  true  religious  consciousness  and the
guidance of  conduct flowing from it,  in the absence which is common in out
times to all the nations of the East and the West, from Japan to England and
America: lies the chief  if not the sole cause of the enslavement of all the
Indian peoples by the English.


II


     O  ye, who see perplexities over your  heads and beneath  your feet, to
the right and to the left! you been an eternal enigma unto yourselves, until
you become humble and joyful as children.  Then you will find Me, and having
found Me in yourselves, you will rule over  worlds and looking out  from the
great  world within to the little  world without, you will  bless everything
that is and find all is well with time and with you.
     (Krishna P. 164.)

     In order to make my thoughts clear I must go back a considerable time.
     We do not know, and  cannot know  (  I boldly say  -- we need  not) how
mankind lived millions, or even tens of thousands of years  ago; but in  all
those  times of which we have any reliable knowledge, we find  that Humanity
has  lived  in separate  tribes,  clans,  nations,  in which  the  majority,
submitting to the apparently inevitable, has permitted  the coercive rule of
one,  or  several  persons  of the  minority. We know this  beyond a  doubt.
Notwithstanding  the  external  diversity  of events  and persons,  such  an
organization of human  life has manifested itself  in a  similar way, in all
the  countries of whose previous history we know anything. And such an order
of life, the further  back you  go, was always looked upon  as the necessary
basis for concordant social intercourse by both the rulers and the ruled.
     Thus it  was everywhere. But in spite of such an external order of life
having existed for centuries and continuing even until now, a  long time ago
-- thousands of years before our time, in the midst of different nations and
often from  out the very center of  this order of life resting  on coercion,
one  and the same thought has been expressed, - that in every individual one
spiritual  source  manifests  itself, which is life  itself,  and  that this
Spiritual source  tends to unification with everything  which is homogeneous
with it, and attains this  unification  by love. This thought in its various
forms has been  expressed  with more  or  less completeness and lucidity  at
different times and in various places. It has  been expressed in Brahminism,
Judaism,   Mazdeism   (the  teaching   of  Zoroaster),   Buddhism,   Taoism,
Confucianism,  in  the  writings  of  the  Greek  and  Roman sages,  and  in
Christianity  and  Mohammedanism. Already  the  fact  that one  and the same
thought has been expressed in the midst of the most  diverse nations  and at
different times  and places, indicates  that  this  thought was  inherent in
human nature and contained the truth in itself.
     But this truth appeared to those who considered  that the only possible
way of uniting people into societies, was violence on the part of one set to
others to be in opposition to the existing order, and, moreover, at the time
of  its  first  appearance,  it  was expressed in such  a  vague fragmentary
manner, that  although the people embraced it as a theory, they  were unable
to accept it as an authoritative guidance for conduct. Besides, in regard to
all  the expressions  of this truth as it  was  gradually proclaimed amongst
people whose life was founded on violence, always occurred one and  the same
thing, vis. those  who enjoyed the benefits derived from  power finding that
the  recognition  by  the people  of  this truth  undermined their position,
consciously or unconsciously distorted this  truth by  every means  in their
power, attaching to it attributes  and  meanings totally foreign to  it, and
also opposed  its dissemination by downright violence. Thus the  truth which
is  so natural to humanity  --  
that human  life should  be  guided  by  the
spiritual principle  which is  the  foundation of  human  life and manifests
itself  in love,
 - in order to enter man's consciousness had to struggle not
only  with the  incompleteness  of  its  expressions and the intentional and
unintentional  distortions of it,  but  also with deliberate  violence which
compels  by means of  punishments  and  persecutions the acceptance  of that
explanation  of the religious  law established by the  authorities, which is
opposed  to this truth. Such a  misrepresentation and obscuration of the new
but  as  yet  imperfectly  explained  truth,   took  place  everywhere,   in
Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, Christianity, in Mahommedanism  and also  in
your Brahminism.


III


     My hand has  sowed love everywhere, giving unto  all that will receive.
Blessings  are  offered  unto  all my  children,  but  many times  in  their
blindness they  fail to  see them.  How  few there are who gather the  gifts
which lie in  profusion  at their feet; how many  there  are who, in willful
waywardness,  turn their eyes away  from them  and complain with a wail that
they have not that which I have given them! Many of them defiantly repudiate
not only my  Gifts,  but  Me also,  Me, the Source of  all blessings and the
Author of their Being.
     (Krishna P. 161.)

     O,  tarry  awhile  from  the turmoil and strife  of  the world.  I will
beautify  and quicken thy life with love and with joy,  for the light of the
Soul is love.  Where love is there is contentment and peace, and where there
is contentment and peace there am I also in their midst.
     (Krishna P. 163-164.)

     The aim of the Sinless One consists in acting without causing sorrow to
others, although he could attain to great power by ignoring their feelings.
     The aim of the Sinless  one lies in not doing evil unto  those who have
done evil unto him.
     If  a  man  causes suffering  even to those  who hate  him without  any
reason, he will ultimately have grief not to be overcome.
     The punishment of evil  doers consists in making  them feel ashamed  of
themselves by doing them a great kindness.
     Of what use is  superior knowledge in the one, if he does not endeavour
to relieve his neighbour's wants as much as his own?
     If, in the morning a man wishes to do evil unto another, in the evening
the evil will return to him.
     (Hindoo Kural)

     This has taken place everywhere. The  fact  that  love  is the  highest
moral feeling was accepted universally, but the  truth itself was interwoven
with many  and varied falsehoods, which so  distorted it,  that  nothing but
mere words  remained, out of this  recognition of love  as the highest moral
feeling.  The  theory  was  advanced  that  this  highest moral  feeling  is
applicable only to the  individual life, that it was good only for home use,
-  but  in  social life  all forms of violence,  prisons,  executions, wars,
involving acts diametrically opposed to the feeblest sensation of love, were
regarded as  indispensable for the  protection of the  majority against evil
doers. Notwithstanding that  common sense clearly indicates, that if one set
of people can arrogate  to themselves the right to decide as to which people
are to be subjected to all kinds of coercion for the supposed welfare of the
many, it naturally follows that those few individuals to whom violence is so
applied  could also come to  the same conclusion with regard  to  the ruling
caste  which subjected them  to violence: and  although the  great religious
teachers,  - Brahmin, Buddhist and especially Christian, - anticipating this
perversion  of  the law  of love, directed attention to the  one  inevitable
condition of love: the enduring of affronts, injuries, all kinds of violence
without resisting the  evil by evil, - mankind continued to accept  what was
incompatible: the beneficence of love, and with it the resistance of evil by
violence, which is and must be opposed to love. And such teachings, in spite
of the palpable contradiction  which is in them, have taken such a deep hold
upon  the  people, that while believing in  the beneficiency of love, people
fail  to question the  lawfulness  of  an order of life founded on coercion,
which includes the  imposition not only  of  tortures but also  of death, by
some persons upon others.
     For  a long  time people  lived in this obvious  contradiction  without
noticing it. But the day came when  this contradiction began  to stagger the
more thoughtful people of different nations.  And the ancient  simple  truth
that it was natural for people to help and to love, instead of torturing and
killing each other, began to dawn upon the minds of men and became every day
clearer, while  the acceptance of those false interpretations by  which  the
deviations from it were justified, became less and less convincing.
     In  ancient  times the  chief  justification of violence was the theory
that so-called monarchs, tsars, sultans, rajahs,  shahs, and other heads  of
states had peculiar and  Divine  rights.  But the longer  people lived,  the
faith in special rights  of  monarchs sanctioned by  God, became  weaker and
weaker. This faith declined in equal degree and almost simultaneously in the
Christian, in the Brahman, in the Buddhist and in the Confucian spheres, and
it has  recently become  so feeble that it can no  longer  serve,  as it did
before, as a justification of acts openly opposed to common sense and to the
true religious feeling. People saw more  and more distinctly, and today  the
majority  see  quite  clearly  the  absurdity  and  the immortality  of  the
submission of one's will to that of others like oneself, who require of them
actions not  only  contrary to  their material welfare but which  are also a
violation of their moral feelings. It is,  therefore, perfectly natural that
people  who have lost faith  in the supported by religion  divinity  of  the
authority  of all manner of potentates,  should endeavour to free themselves
from  it.  But  unfortunately  during  the  domination  of  those  monarchs,
considered to be Divenely appointed beings, established themselves near  the
courts, an  ever increasing number  of  persons,  which  under the guise  of
government class took care that as  soon as  the old  religious fraud  about
divine  rule  of monarchs should cease to be believed  by people another and
similar deception should take its place and  continue in the same way as the
old one to keep nations in slavery to a limited numbers of rulers.


IV


     Children,  do you want to  know  by what your hearts should  be guided?
Throw aside  your longings and strivings after that which is  null and void;
get  rid of  your  erroneous thoughts about happiness,  and wisdom, and your
empty and insincere desires. Dispense with these and you will know love.
     (Krishna P. 171.)

     Be not the destroyers of yourselves. Arise to your true Being, and then
you will have nothing to fear.
     (Krishna P. 177.)

     New vindications  of the power of potentates have replaced the obsolete
ones. These  justifications are  as groundless as those  they superseded but
they are still new; hence their inconsistency cannot at once be  quite clear
to the majority, and, besides, the people who make use  of  power  propagate
them  and  support them in such a skilful manner  that  these justifications
appear to many as quite incontrovertible, even to those who suffer from what
they justify. These new vindications are termed scientific.
     "Scientific" is a word that has  for the majority the same power as has
the word "religious". As all that was 
called religious
 for the simple reason
that it  was called  
religious
  implied that it  should be always the truth,
exactly  in the same way all that is called 
scientific
 for the simple reason
that it is called 
Science
, is  always regarded as undoubtedly true. Thus, in
this case the outlived religious justification of  violence  which consisted
in the  recognition of the peculiarity and  divinity of  personages being in
power and  put  in power  by God  ("there is no  power  but  from God")  was
replaced by the justification consisting in the  first  place  of  the fact,
that as amongst people, the coercion  of some by others has always been,  it
is proved that such violence must continue indefinitely. In this, i.e.  that
mankind should not live according to reason and conscience, but in obedience
to that which has for a long time been taking place amongst them, in this is
embodied what "Science" terms the "historical laws". The second "scientific"
justification is, that as amongst plants and animals a struggle or existence
goes  on which always culminates  in the  survival of the fittest, the  same
struggle  should  go on  amongst men (notwithstanding  that men  are  beings
endowed with the  attributes of  reason and love, faculties which are absent
from  beings  submitting  to the law  of  struggle  and selection).  In this
consists the second "scientific" justification of violence.
     The third scientific justification  of violence the most prominent, and
unfortunately  the  most  widespread, is  in  reality the  oldest  religious
justification only a  little altered  which is the  theory that  the  use of
violence in  social  life  against  some,  for  the  welfare  of  others  is
inevitable, and, however desirable love amongst people might be, coercion is
indispensable. The  difference  between  the  justification  of  violence by
pseudo science  and that of pseudo religion is in fact that to the question,
"Why  such and such people, and not  others,  have the right to decide as to
whom  violence may and  must be used against". -- science does not give  the
same  reply as that which religion had formulated:  that these decisions are
just because  they are pronounced by personages who  possess a divine power,
but that  these decisions represent the will of the majority, which, under a
constitutional form of  government  is supposed to express itself in all the
decisions and actions of the 
party
 who at any given time is in power.
     Such  are the scientific  vindications of coercion. These vindications,
although quite groundless,  are so necessary  to people occupying privileged
positions  that they  as  implicitly believe  in  them, and  as  confidently
propagate  them,  as they  formerly  did  the  doctrine  of  the  immaculate
conception.
     Meantime the  unhappy  majority weighed  down by toil, is so dazzled by
the display which accompanies the  propagation of these "scientific truths",
that, under this new  influence it  accepts them  as readily as it  formerly
accepted  the  pseudo  religious  justifications  and  continues  to  submit
slavishly to new potentates who are just as cruel as the former one, but who
have some what increased in number.


V


     Who am I?  I  am  that which thou hast searched for since thy baby eyes
gazed  wonderingly  upon  the world, whose horizon  but hides this real life
from thee.  I am that  which in thy heart thou hast prayed  for, demanded as
thy birthright,  although thou hast not known what it  was.  I am that which
has lain in thy soul for hundreds and thousands of years. Sometimes I lay in
thee grieving, because thou didst not  recognize me;  sometimes I raised  my
head, opened my eyes,  and extended my arms calling thee either tenderly and
quietly, or  strenuously, demanding  that  thou should'st  rebel against the
hard iron earth-chains which held thee hound to clay.
     (Krishna P. 192.)

     Thus it has  been,  and still is, going on in the Christian  world. One
could  hope that in the  vast Brahmin, Buddhist, Confucian worlds  this  new
scientific  superstition would not  have place, and  that  the Chinese,  the
Japanese,  the  Hindoos, having seen the  falsity  of  religious impositions
which justify violence, would proceed direct to the conception of the law of
love inherent in humanity, which has been so clearly enunciated by the great
teachers  of the East. But it appears that the scientific superstition which
replaced  the religious one, is  getting a firmer  and firmer  grip upon the
Oriental nations. It has now a specially  strong  hold on  the  land of  the
extreme East,  Japan, not only upon  its  leaders but on the majority of its
people and its precursor to  the greatest  calamities. It has taken hold  of
China with her 400  millions of inhabitants, and also of your India with her
200 millions,  or at least the bulk  of the people who look upon themselves,
as you do, as the leaders of these peoples.
     In your  magazine you insert as the basis principle which should direct
the  activity  of  your  people  the   following  thought  as  an  epigraph:

"Resistance  to  aggression  is not simply justifiable  but  imperative; non
resistance hurts both Altruism and Egoism"
.
     You say  that  the  English  have  enslaved  and  keep  the  Hindoos in
subjection because  the latter have not  resisted sufficiently,  and do  not
resist the violence by force.
     But it is just the contrary. If  the English have enslaved the Hindoos,
it  is just because the Hindoos recognized and do recognize  coercion as the
main and fundamental principle of their  social  order: in  the name of this
principle  they  submitted  to  their  little  Radjas,  in  their  name they
struggled  with each other, fought  with Europeans, with the English, and at
present are preparing to a struggle with them again.
     A commercial  company enslaved a nation  comprising 200  millions. Tell
this to  a man free from superstition and he will fail to  grasp  what these
words mean. What does it  mean that thirty thousand people not athletes, but
rather weak  and illooking have  enslaved 200  millions of vigorous, clever,
strong freedom-loving people? Do not  the figures make it clear that not the
English, but the Hindoos, have enslaved themselves?
     For  the Hindoos to complain that  the English have  enslaved  them, is
equal to people who are addicted to drink, complaining that vendors of wine,
who have settled in their midst, have enslaved them. You tell them that they
can abstain from drinking, but they answer that they are so accustomed to it
that  they cannot  abstain, that  they  find  it necessary to  keep up their
energy by wine. Is  not  that the case with all the people, with millions of
people who submit to thousands  and hundreds of individuals, either of their
own nation or of foreign nations?
     If  the  Hindoos have been enslaved  by violence  it  is  because  they
themselves have  lived  by violence, live by violence, and do  not recognize
the eternal law of love, inherent in humanity.
     "Pitiful and ignorant is the man who seeks what he has already got, but
is unaware that he has it. Yes, pitiful and ignorant is the man who does not
know  the  bliss  of  that  love  which surrounds  him, which  I  gave  him"
(Krishna).
     If man  lives only in accord with  the law of  love  which includes non
resistance, which has been  already revealed to him  and is  natural  to his
heart,  and hence  does not participate in  any form  of violence, not  only
hundreds  will not enslave  millions but  even  millions  will be  unable to
enslave one individual. Do not resist evil, but also yourselves  participate
not in evil, in the  violent deeds of the administration, of the law courts,
the collection of taxes, and what is most important of the  soldiers, and no
one in the world will enslave you.
     Love is the only means of saving people from all disasters which he may
undergo. In your case the only  means of liberating your people from slavery
lies in love. Love as  the religious foundation of human life was proclaimed
with  striking force and lucidity in  the  midst  of your people  in  remote
antiquity. Love,  without non-resistance  is a  contradiction in itself. And
there,  in the  20
[th]
 century you, a member of one  of  the most
religious  of  peoples,  with a  light  heart and with  confidence  in  your
undoubted righteousness -- you deny this law, repeating -- pardon me -- that
colossal  error  which they, the defenders of violence,  the  enemies of the
truth, at first the  servants  of  theology, then of  science, your European
teachers, have instilled into you.


VI


     O, ye who sit  in bondage, and  continually seek and  pant for freedom,
seek only  love.  Love  is peace in itself and  peace which  gives  complete
satisfaction. I  am the key that  opens to the  rarely discovered land where
contentment alone is found.
     (Krishna P. 167)

     To  the  humanity  of our  times, Eastern or  Western,  the same  thing
happens which takes place in regard  to every individual when  he is passing
from one age to the other  (a  child becoming  a youth, a  youth a man)  and
loses that  which  has  been  hitherto  his  guide  in life, and  not having
elucidated a new one appropriate to  his age, lives without any guidance and
invents  various anxieties, cares,  amusements, provocations, intoxications,
to distract  his attention from the misery and selfishness of his  own life.
Such a condition may last a long time.
     But  as  during  the  translation  of  an individual  from  one age top
another, the time must inevitably come when life can no longer  continue  in
the old ruts  as  before, in senseless  anxiety and  irritation, and the man
must understand that the  previous guidance for life is no longer applicable
to him, - it  does  not follow that he  must  necessarily  live without  any
rational  guidance  whatever, but  that  he should  formulate for himself  a
theory of life corresponding to his age, and having elucidated it, he should
in his new age be guided by it.
     Similar  crises must of necessity  occur in  the ever changing life  of
humanity.  And  I am  of  opinion  that the  time has  arrived  for  such  a
transition of humanity from one age to another, and not in the sense that it
has  arrived  now, vis. 1908, but that  the inherent contradiction of  human
life; the consciousness  of  the beneficence  of the  law of  love,  and the
system of life built upon the law  of  violence opposed  to love in our time
has reached that degree of intensity under which it can no longer go on, and
must be met by a solution, and evidently not with a  solution  which favours
the outlived law of violence,  but  in  favour  of the truth that the law of
human life is  the  law  of love, cherished  by all  humanity  from the most
remote antiquity.
     The recognition of this truth in  its full significance is possible for
men, only  when they free  themselves completely from all religious, as well
as  scientific  superstitions  by means of  which it has been for  centuries
hidden from mankind.
     In order to save a sinking ship it is  necessary to throw overboard the
ballast, which though it  might have been indispensable at  one  time, would
now cause  destruction. It is exactly the same with religious and scientific
superstitions which hide this salutary truth  from men. In order that people
could embrace  the truth, not in such a vague way as it presented  itself to
them during their childhood, nor  in such a onesided, unstable way as it was
interpreted  to them by  religious and  scientific  teachers, but in such  a
manner that it should become the highest law of human life; to effect  this,
the complete  liberation  of  this truth from  all, 
all
 those  superstitions
pseudo  religious as  well as  pseudo scientific which now  obscure  it,  is
necessary, not a partial, timid liberation, such a one as in the religion of
the  Sakas, and in Christianity  by Luther,  or similar  reformers in  other
religions, but a complete deliverance of  the religious truth from all those
ancient religious, as well as from the modern scientific superstitions.
     If people only freed themselves from beliefs in all kinds  of  Ormuzds,
Brahmas, Sabbaoths, their incarnation in  Krishnas and Christs, from beliefs
in  a  paradise  and  hell,  in  angels  and  demons,  from  reincarnations,
resurrections, from  the idea of the interference of God in the life of  the
universe; free themselves chiefly from the recognition of the  infallibility
of the various  Vedas, Bibles, Gospels, Triptakas, Koranas,  etc.; if people
only freed themselves also from blindly believing in all sorts of scientific
doctrines about infinitesimally small atoms, molecules, about  all kinds  of
infinitely great  and  infinitely remote  worlds, about their movements  and
their  origin,  about  forces; from  the  implicit faith  in  all manner  of
theoretical scientific laws to which man is supposed to be  subjected -- the
historic and  economic laws, the laws of struggle  and  survival, etc., - if
people  only  freed themselves from this terrible accumulation  of the  idle
exercises of our lower capacities  of mind and  memory  which are called the
Sciences, from all  the  innumerable divisions  of  all sorts of  histories,
anthropologies,  homiletics, bacteriologies, jurisprudences,  cosmographies,
strategies, their name  is legion; if  people only relive themselves of this
ruinous intoxicating ballast, - that simple, explicit law of love accessible
to  all,  which  is  so  natural  to  mankind,  solving  all  questions  and
perplexities, will of its own accord become clear and obligatory.


VII


     Children, look at the flowers at  your feet; do not trample  upon them.
Look at the love in your midst and do not repudiate it.
     (Krishna P. 178.)

     There is a  higher reason which transcends all  human  minds. It is far
and  near. It permeates all the  worlds  and at the  same time is infinitely
higher than they.
     A man who  sees  that  all  things are contained in the higher  spirit,
cannot treat any being with contempt.
     For him to whom all  spiritual beings  are equal to  the highest, there
can be no room for deception or grief.
     
Those who are ignorant and are devoted to the religious rites only, are
in a deep gloom, but those who are given up to fruitless  meditations are in
a still greater darkness.

     (Upanishads, from Vedas.)

     Yes, in our time, men -- to escape from self inflicted calamities which
have reached the highest degree of intensity: whether it be a Hindoo seeking
liberation from  the subjugation  of the  English,  or any other  man in his
struggle with those using violence -- whether in the negro's fights with the
North American,  or the  Persian's, Russian's or the Turk's  fight  with his
Government, as well as any man who seeks the greatest amount of welfare  for
himself  as  well as for  everybody  -- do not require new explanations  and
justifications  of  old  religious  superstitions,   as  Vivekanandas,  Baba
Bharatis and others have  formulated in  your country, and in  the Christian
world; an infinite number of such new interpreters and expounders of what no
one  stands in need; nor the  innumerable  sciences  about matters which not
only  are unnecessary but mostly  harmful  (in the spiritual realm there  is
nothing indifferent, but  what is not useful is always harmful). The Hindoo,
as well as the Englishman, the Frenchman, the German,  the Russian,  do  not
require  constitutions, revolutions,  any  conferences, congresses,  any new
ingenious  devices  for  submarine navigation,  aerial navigation,  powerful
explosives,  or all  kinds of  conveniences  for  the enjoyment of  the rich
ruling   classes;  not  new   schools,  universities  with   instruction  in
innumerable  sciences,  not  the  augmentation  of  papers  and  books,  and
gramophones  and  cinematographs,  not  those  childish  and  mostly corrupt
stupidities  which  are  called  arts; but  one  thing only is  needful: the
knowledge of  that simple lucid truth  -- that  the law of human life is the
law of love,  which gives the highest happiness to every individual, as well
as to all  mankind.  If people only  free themselves in their  consciousness
from those  mountains of nonsense  which hide the  truth from them; and that
indubitable eternal truth inherent  to mankind which is one  and the same in
all the  great religions  of  the world, will inevitably  enter the soul  of
every  man.  And  as  soon as this  is  acknowledged by the  great majority,
stupidity which now conceals it will disappear and  with  it will by  itself
disappear all the evils from which humanity now suffers.
     "Children, look upwards with  your beclouded eyes, and a world full  of
joy  and  love will  disclose itself  to you,  a rational world made  by  my
wisdom, the only real world. Then you will know what love has done with you,
what love has bestowed upon you, and what love demands from you" (Krishna).

     Dec. 14
[th]
, 1908.
     Yasnaya Pollyanna.

     (Complete Works of  Leo  Tolstoy, Academic Jubilee Edition,  Volume 35,
pages 245 -- 258)


